Add bitshifts to porting guide (#3772)
ROCm-Developer-Tools/HIP: docs/how-to/hip_porting_guide.rst

code, while the host can query it during runtime via the device properties. See
the :ref:`HIP language extension for warpSize <warp_size>` for information on
how to write portable wave-aware code.

Lane masks bit-shift
================================================================================

A thread in a warp is also called a lane, and a lane mask is a bitmask where
each bit corresponds to a thread in a warp. A bit is 1 if the thread is active,
0 if it's inactive. Bit-shift operations are typically used to create lane masks
and on AMD GPUs the ``warpSize`` can differ between different architectures,
that's why it's essential to use correct bitmask type, when porting code.

Example:

.. code-block:: cpp

  // Get the thread's position in the warp
  unsigned int laneId = threadIdx.x % warpSize;

  // Use lane ID for bit-shift
  val & ((2 << (threadIdx.x % warpSize) )-1 );

  // Shift 32 bit integer with val variable
  WarpReduce::sum( (val < warpSize) ? (1 << val) : 0);

Lane masks are 32-bit integer types as this is the integer precision that C 
assigns to such constants by default. GCN/CDNA architectures have a warp size of

> 64, :code:`threadIdx.x % warpSize` and :code:`val` in the example may obtain 

Reviewer: GCN/CDNA architectures have a warpsize of 64 by default?

Author: GCN/CDNA architectures have a warpsize of 64, that's not changeable at GCN/CDNA. So no need for the by default.

> values greater than 31. Consequently, shifting by such values would  clear the 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
values greater than 31. Consequently, shifting by such values would clear the 
```

> 32-bit register to which the shift operation is applied to. For AMD

Reviewer: ```suggestion
32-bit register to which the shift operation is applied. For AMD
```

architectures, a straightforward fix could look as follows:

.. code-block:: cpp
  
  // Get the thread's position in the warp
  unsigned int laneId = threadIdx.x % warpSize;

  // Use lane ID for bit-shift

>   val & ((2ull << (threadIdx.x % warpSize) )-1 );

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  val & ((2 << (threadIdx.x % warpSize) )-1 );
```

Author: `2ull` means that variable 2 is unsigned long long, and it's necessary to have correct results here.

Reviewer: Sorry...looked like a typo

  // Shift 64 bit integer with val variable
  WarpReduce::sum( (val < warpSize) ? (1ull << val) : 0);

> For portability reasons, one should rather introduce appropriately
> typed placeholders as shown below:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For portability reasons, it is better to introduce appropriately
typed placeholders as shown below:
```

.. code-block:: cpp

>   #if defined(__GFX8__) || defined(__GFX9__)

Reviewer: Why wouldn't this be based on the warpsize specified rather than the GPU?

Author: Because the warpSize parameter will be non compile time variable and here we need compile time variable.
More details under the issue: https://github.com/ROCm/ROCm/issues/4121

Reviewer: Would it be worth adding how to obtain a compile time variable?

0 if it's inactive. Bit-shift operations are typically used to create lane masks
and on AMD GPUs the ``warpSize`` can differ between different architectures,
that's why it's essential to use correct bitmask type, when porting code.

Example:

.. code-block:: cpp

  // Get the thread's position in the warp
  unsigned int laneId = threadIdx.x % warpSize;

  // Use lane ID for bit-shift
  val & ((2 << (threadIdx.x % warpSize) )-1 );

  // Shift 32 bit integer with val variable
  WarpReduce::sum( (val < warpSize) ? (1 << val) : 0);

Lane masks are 32-bit integer types as this is the integer precision that C 
assigns to such constants by default. GCN/CDNA architectures have a warp size of
64, :code:`threadIdx.x % warpSize` and :code:`val` in the example may obtain 
values greater than 31. Consequently, shifting by such values would clear the 
32-bit register to which the shift operation is applied. For AMD
architectures, a straightforward fix could look as follows:

.. code-block:: cpp
  
  // Get the thread's position in the warp
  unsigned int laneId = threadIdx.x % warpSize;

  // Use lane ID for bit-shift

>   val & ((2ull << (threadIdx.x % warpSize) )-1 );

Reviewer 2: Not extremely important but: I would use 1ull instead of 2ull just to simplify the example, because it is more common in gpu code (e.g. that way the example would be unsetting all the higher bits associated with lanes above the current lane)

Author: @g-h-c Updated to 1.

clear the 32-bit register to which the shift operation is applied to. For AMD
architectures, a straightforward fix could look as follows:

.. code-block:: cpp
  
  // Get the thread's position in the warp
  unsigned int laneId = threadIdx.x % warpSize;

  // Use lane ID for bit-shift
  val & ((2ull << (threadIdx.x % warpSize) )-1 );

  // Shift 64 bit integer with val variable
  WarpReduce::sum( (val < warpSize) ? (1ull << val) : 0);

For portability reasons, one should rather introduce appropriately
typed placeholders as shown below:

.. code-block:: cpp

  #ifdef __HIP_PLATFORM_AMD__
  typedef uint64_t lane_mask_t;
  #else
  typedef uint32_t lane_mask_t;
  #endif
  constexpr lane_mask_t LANE_MASK_ONE = 1;
  constexpr lane_mask_t LANE_MASK_TWO = 2;

The use of :code-block:`lane_mask_t` with the previous example:

.. code-block:: cpp

  // Get the thread's position in the warp
  unsigned int laneId = threadIdx.x % warpSize;

  // Use lane ID for bit-shift
  val & ((LANE_MASK_TWO << (threadIdx.x % warpSize) )-1 );

  // Shift 32 or 64 bit integer with val variable
  WarpReduce::sum( (val < warpSize) ? (LANE_MASK_ONE << val) : 0);

.. note:: 

>   RDNA cards have "CU mode" where the warp size is 64 and the kernels have to be

Reviewer 3: In my own tests CU mode does not force warp_size to be 64, what it does instead is that it enforces two warps to be executed simultaneously per block, whereas WGP mode enforces four warps to be executed simultaneously per block.
